---
layout: blog
title: Finishing Books
date: 2020-07-25T20:54:53.749Z
---
Lately I've been having trouble finishing books. I start a lot of books because I'm a curious person and my slow-paced, quiet-loving temperament has been well suited (for most of my life) to engaging with text. But more and more often I'll tire of a book before completing the first fifty pages, and I'll set it aside to start another, and that process repeats *ad nauseum*. 

There's something in the air that keeps me from seeing books through to the end. One of the few books I've finished in 2020 was Alan Jacobs' *The Pleasures of Reading in an Age of Distraction*. Jacobs posits, with some supporting anecdotes and brain science, that the Internet is to blame. My case isn't unique in the U.S.; American culture's growing preference for hypertext comes at the expense of our brain's ability to concentrate on old fashioned ink-on-paper text. We've allowed our brains to be rewired, and assuming we see this as a bad thing then we need to take active steps to rewire it back.

So I'm doing something of an exercise regimen. I've slowly weened myself off of Facebook and Twitter and have seen that I am generally able to get in more time for reading. (It's opened up more time for video games and YouTube, too, but let's handle one vice at a time.) This was a slightly scary move, actually. I don't want to become uninformed or push off the emotional labor of managing friendships onto others. But I've found that none of important relationships have suffered as I've left social media behind, and it's been good for my mood, my creativity, and my reading time.

Another change that's bought me back some time is to spend less time browsing at books online. I grew up in the California countryside, an hour from the nearest Barnes & Noble, so getting to go to a big bookstore was always a big deal for me. It may seem naive and silly, but I still feel some of that magic of browsing in a huge bookstore whenever I shop on Amazon. The problem with that is you spend so much time looking for books and at books that you spend less time *actually* *reading*. I have to consciously remind myself that *reading about* isn't the same as *reading*.

While these changes have increased the quantity I read it hasn't done much for the quality of attention I bring to my reading, which I'm convinced is what leads to quitting a book well before the end. To strengthen the quality of my reading time, I've begun a practice of reading 10 pages a day of some heavy book that hardly anybody would ever read for pleasure. My goal here is to deliberately move myself, no matter how long or boring the journey may be, into a larger world of ideas and shared cultural references, trusting that along the way I'll regain the skills and strengths needed to thrive there.

It's been going well so far. I've started with Thucydides' *History of the Peloponnesian War*. I majored in classical languages back at Fresno State but only ever read Thucydides in bits and pieces for a variety of courses. Reading it from the beginning, giving myself time to look at maps, take notes, and have conversations about it with my wife (who is an historian), has given me a new appreciation for the rewards of slowing down and getting the most out of a book.

All of this said, it's important not to fetishize finishing books. Put time into really getting the most out of books and you'll just find yourself reading more and inevitably finishing more books. Finishing books is just a side-effect of giving your mind the space it needs to do quality reading.