---
layout: blog
title: No Code Tools for Scaffolding
date: 2021-04-16
---

At React Rally 2019 I attended Mihai Cernusca's excellent presentation ["Off Balance: Interactive Storytelling with React"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CqQX_pIAJug). What really stuck with me was the notion of inventing non-obvious solutions for common problems. For example, building a wooden scaffold to lay bricks across when creating an arch. Once the bricks are in place you can remove the scaffold. The finished artifact contains no trace of the mechanisms that were necessary for its own creation: the solution is non-obvious.

I always think of Mihai's talk when reading about no-code tools for building web UIs. When I was first learning to build web UIs (for static sites, not dynamic apps) I would sketch my ideas in [Adobe Dreamweaver](https://www.adobe.com/products/dreamweaver.html)'s WYSIWYG editor and then dive into the code to do cleanup. Dreamweaver would make some questional choices about semantic elements and add in oddly specific styling rules and metadata, but I knew enough to remove what wasn't necessary. Dreamweaver was like a clumsy but prolific teammate; it handled a lot of the grunt work so that I could just focus on quality control.

I had a similar experience creating some SVG icons yesterday. I wasted a couple hours fiddling with path elements and reading about fill-rule attributes before deciding to just open [Inkscape](https://inkscape.org/), create the SVGs I wanted visually, and then hand-edit the code that Inkscape spit out. It was significantly easier and more fun.

This gets to a hard-won lesson I've learned in my career: **Your job as a software engineer is to solve problems using software (assuming software is the right solution for the problem).** 

Your job as a software engineer **isn't** writing code. No sensible business cares how much code you write or whether it sprang fully formed from your imagination. Maybe you write the software yourself, maybe you assemble it from snippets generated by Dreamweaver and found on Stack Overflow, or maybe you pay someone to write it for you. Maybe the solution isn't software at all but a better offline work process (i.e.  getting the right people to start talking to eachother). What matters is that the problems get solved in ways that don't create more problems. Part of "don't create more problems" is making sure the code you commit is understandable, maintainable, testable, etc. so you'll never be free of the responsibility of cleaning up the code generated by no-code tools like Dreamweaver or [Webflow](https://webflow.com/). But you'll have the responsibility either way, so why not use these tools as scaffolding to improve your workflow?

The best solutions are rarely obvious. Leveraging experience and imagination to find those solutions is the value a software engineer provides, not code.
