---
layout: blog
title: Perfect Practice Makes Perfect
date: 2020-04-07T18:42:06.239Z
---
Locked into working from home because of COVID-19 and desperately in need of a distraction from the news, I've begun playing classical piano again after a 15 year hiatus. It's a fun and frustrating exercise that's had me thinking a lot about how we grow personally and professionally.

Just twenty minutes a day is enough time to make serious progress at learning piano. But when you're trying to learn something as complex and open-ended as the piano, noticeable progress occurs on the scale of weeks and months rather than minutes or hours. To succeed at learning the piano, you have to make the same mistakes tens or even hundreds of times over and not lose heart. Now, much more than when I was a kid, I enjoy the repetitive aspect of practice. I'll play the same four measures over and over again: ten minutes of just the left hand, ten minutes of the right, ten minutes of both together. You start to know every detail of the music, and as you master the more mundane concerns like how you're going to get your fingers from one key to the next you get to start thinking about interpretation and meaning. In other words, you go beyond making sound to making music. And that, after all the time you put in, is when you feel you've made real progress.

Throughout this slow progress you come to accept that your body will learn things that your mind cannot. How my two hands can play completely different series of notes at the same time is beyond my understanding, but I know from experience that they can. It's more muscular than intellectual, more a matter of faith than of figuring out. As an analytical person this bothers me a little, but I also know that you have to be comfortable working with abstractions so that you don't get bogged down in details.